The United States is in a unique
position because it is being hoist on
the petard of its own rhetoric. That is,
we're a nation of immigrants and there's
some kind of follow-on from that, which
I don't believe is valid, that we
therefore have no right to keep anybody
out.
>> Lionel Shriver, whose latest novel is
about immigration. Do you think that
your fiction has been changed by your
immersion in social and political
issues?
>> I'm interested in the big issues of my
day. And if I'm going to participate in
the world as opposed to be an artist and
write these rarefied pretty sentences,
you know, that's a choice. And I've made
my choice.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussein show.
More than 20 years ago, Lionel Shriver
made her name as a novelist with a book
called We Need to Talk About Kevin.
It's a portrait of motherhood and a
marriage alongside a school shooting and
it won its author accolades and awards.
Since then, Shriver has often drawn on
contemporary issues in her fiction, but
perhaps never more than with her latest,
which is called A Better Life. It's set
in New York during the period of the
Biden administration when there were
large numbers of immigrants crossing the
United States southern border.
And that's where our conversation begins
with the plot of her new book. But we
also go back in time through America's
story and her own. She is the daughter
of a pastor, descended from immigrants,
who has chosen to be one herself for
much of her adult life. For decades, the
UK was her home. Then, she left for
Portugal for reasons that include
immigration. As a companion to this
episode, I do recommend the written
version on bloomberg.com, which is where
you'll find my notes and added context
on the topics we discuss. First though,
to that new book, A Better Life, and
Lionel Shriver explaining to me where
the idea came from.
>> Well, I first got the idea for this book
watching then New York City Mayor Eric
Adams
announce
on the news that City of New York was
planning to start a program whereby in
order to deal with this hundreds of
thousands of migrants coming into New
York during the Biden
administration.
Uh they would pay New Yorkers to put up
uh migrants in their spare bedrooms.
As it turns out
this program never happened.
But it did in my book.
So I I just thought that's
that's a brilliant setup. After all
what could go wrong?
>> Yeah, well,
as as uh as I think you're hinting at
plenty does in the book. So there's uh
the woman Gloria whose home it is,
Martine who is the woman from Honduras
who she takes in, and then there's
Gloria's son Nico who has his own
complexities in his life but is
your main character really, more so than
the mother.
>> seen through the eyes of this
26-year-old
layabout. He has an engineering degree
but has done absolutely nothing with it.
He doesn't want to be anything.
He doesn't want to do anything.
He aspires to nothing. His life has a
kind of weird purity to it.
And
ultimately of course he doesn't want to
be grown up.
Right?
>> And were Are thinking of real people? Is
that how you work when it comes to your
craft? Obviously
>> I am certainly thinking of real people.
>> know.
>> Well, the many parents who are housing
children in their 20s and sometimes into
their 30s who don't do anything and who
don't support themselves and are really
into a kind of
extended adolescence. And there are
reasons for that that are not
exclusively, oh, they're just lazy or
have no ambition. It's sometimes, you
know, the cost of housing here, for
example.
>> In the UK and in the US?
>> Absolutely. Oh, yes, in both the likes
of London and in New York.
There are a lot of young adults who
cannot afford to have their own homes,
to rent, even to rent their own homes.
It's not a mean portrait, but
in this case, it's a young man who
simply
is boycotting
adulthood. And
what was interesting about writing from
that perspective is how sympathetic I
found myself.
I mean, it's it's daunting to face
responsibility for your life.
It's frightening.
It comes with the threat of failure.
It's a lot
easier and cleaner to just decide you
don't want anything. And that way you
can't fail to get it.
>> The key dynamic in the book is between
Nico and other members of his family and
the migrants who end up living in their
house, not just the original one, but
her brother and others. And I'm going to
quote from a
>> Okay.
>> because I think that this is about
three-quarters of the way through the
book when there's a whole group who have
now arrived and are staying put in the
house in Brooklyn that is Nico's
mother's home. Following the arrival of
the Co-ed Quintet, Nico finally
appreciated what it meant to feel
emasculated. Sure, these skinheads were
digitally literate. They had phones
which they used to stream porn, but
which were otherwise, he sensed,
instruments for the giving and taking of
orders. That is, their phones connect
them to the material world in which
something might happen or be made to
happen other than the delivery of a corn
removal kit from Amazon.
Out here in the wild, wacky universe of
three dimensions, the Pandieros did
whatever they wanted. They took what
they wanted, including a nicely done up
five-bedroom house in Ditmas Park. It is
a metaphor, isn't it, for America? I
think you've said that explicitly. It's
about immigrants taking over America?
>> Yes.
Uh
Biden
letting at least 10 million immigrants,
and we're not sure. It could be as much
as 20.
Because
you only keep track of the people who
want to be kept track of. And the United
States is in a unique position because
it is
being hoisted on the petard of its own
rhetoric.
That is
we've been told
we're a nation of immigrants, and
therefore there's some kind of
follow-on from that, which I I don't
believe is valid. Uh that we therefore
have no right to keep anybody out,
because that would be pulling up the
drawbridge, as the expression has it.
>> that's obviously been part of America's
message to the world. As I read the
book, I was thinking about Reagan's
farewell speech, where he talks about
the shining city on the hill, and how
America is going to be a beacon, a
magnet for all who must have freedom,
from people from the lost places, who
are hurtling through the darkness
towards home. So, it's been a sort It's
a
>> That's the kind of rhetoric I'm talking
about.
>> And it's helped make America rich,
right? It continues to be the most
powerful, richest country in the world.
>> Yes, but you don't um
you don't become rich necessarily, and
the UK knows this as well, by letting in
a lot of people who start out poor,
are not well educated, have very few
skills, and are going to be net takers
on your social welfare system.
>> economies need all kinds of jobs, care
workers.
>> Yes.
>> Low income workers.
>> Yes, but the Danes and the Dutch have
both done
extensive research on particular
nationalities
uh and
how much on average they either
contribute or cost. And there is a huge
disparity. I mean, I
I would advocate a more um
discriminating
immigration system in the best sense of
the word. That is, be choosy, let in
people who are going to contribute
more money than they take, and who will
are very likely to assimilate, to either
speak the language already or learn the
language,
and
join the national project. And I would
like to see both the US and the UK
be selective about who they let in. I'm
sometimes mistaken for somebody who's
just anti-immigration, but I'm not at
all. I'm an immigrant.
>> Yeah.
>> First first to the UK
for many years, and now to Portugal.
>> We will talk in more detail about your
experience in the UK, Lionel. I
definitely want to come back to that.
And but I would say right now, the UK's
immigration system is incredibly choosy.
It gives visas to the people it wants.
But let's just go back to the
Let's go back to the book, right? First
of all, because
>> I'm a sucker for talking about this
subject matter, so I can be easily
distracted into just talking politics.
>> But the subject matter is at is at the
heart of the book. And I And I'm struck
by
how upsetting and enraging the scenes
that you have in the book are, because
there is a takeover of the house and
more. I'm not going to give it all away.
And I have to tell you, the book
featured in in my dreams. I dreamt that
my sons were inviting loads of their
friends into the house without asking my
permission and and I had this image in
my dream of of this long line of boys
their age walking in who I who I hadn't
invited and I woke up feeling quite
shocked and then I thought this book has
made it into my dreams or or my
nightmares. So, the picture you paint is
is very evocative.
But the situation in the US is
completely changed now.
>> Yes.
>> We're speaking early in 2026 and the
latest figures show a decline in
international immigration to the US.
>> Yes. I should clarify I'm not a big
Trump supporter. I'm that's another
point that
a lot of people miss, but
>> You you didn't vote for me the time I
think.
>> In fact
>> I didn't vote for anybody.
>> You didn't vote for anyone last time,
but before that you've been a Democrat
haven't you?
>> Biden.
>> And before that Hillary Clinton?
>> Yeah, I have been a Democrat.
Feel a little distance from the party
now and I could see myself
switching to being an independent and I
think that's probably more accurately
reflects my
political position.
Um but you know, there were a lot of
Americans who did not vote for either
candidate in this last presidential
election.
It's just like
I can't stand either one of them.
>> But you approve of the end to
what was happening at the southern
border.
>> It was out of control.
It has put enormous pressure on
especially the social care systems of
cities.
And I really
concern myself with New York
which was
inundated with more people than it could
handle. New York has a an odd and
and uniquely self-destructive policy of
promising a right to shelter to anyone
who arrives. You almost wonder why
anyone pays rent there.
>> I mean, overall in terms of welfare and
social provision in the United States,
it is the case
as a whole that immigrants pay more in
taxes than receive in benefits.
>> Maybe as a whole, but that's I guess
that's what I'm talking about.
>> The experience locally
>> that that the people who are coming
across the border illegally
are overwhelmingly the kind of migrant
that is going to cost the US taxpayer
money
over their lifetime.
>> Okay. And now that situation is over.
So, now when you look at the latest
statistics where
not only has there been a big decline in
immigration, but the overall population
of the US may start to decline this
year.
Is that a good thing or do you have
concerns about what it means for
economic growth and for the
sustainability of systems into the
future?
>> I think it's a good thing on a
a sociological level.
If you look at the history of the United
States, in spite of the fact that, you
know, we talk up of the many waves of
migrants that we have absorbed and the
United States is very proud of this.
>> Mhm.
And your ancestors would have been
migrants, wouldn't they?
>> Yes. Not my parents, but
uh my great-grandparents on both sides
came from Germany.
>> Mhm.
>> What people seem under aware of is that
after absorbing
many millions of people, uh almost all
of whom were from Europe, so there was a
certain civilizational continuity there,
the US shut down immigration in 1924,
let practically nobody in, and that
lasted until 1965.
I think that period of
letting nobody in,
not kicking anyone out, right?
was crucial
for knitting together a coherent,
unified American population. That was
the kind of successful melding, you
know, the old
a successful melting pot into which I I
was born.
>> Yeah.
>> And it so that when I was born, nobody
was hyphenating their identity. We were
just Americans.
>> Yeah. And again, that was part of the
projection of America to the world. Come
here and you can be Americans. That was
historically what your what your
>> But I'm just saying that we have taken
in so many people
I think that's probably the strongest
argument for a permissive open kind of
open border immigration policy, but I
don't think it should be the only
consideration. First off, the the ideal
solution to this problem is to somehow
induce a cultural awakening whereby
people have more children. I am
skeptical about that, but that's that's
the ideal solution. So but that's why
I'm wondering if you have any concerns
about that idea of immigration decline
and therefore population decline because
it does have serious economic
considerations into the future. Yes, but
there are serious social and political
consequences to letting many people in
from very different cultures. I think
that's probably the strongest argument
for
a permissive open
kind of open border uh immigration
policy.
But I don't think it should be the only
consideration. First off, the the ideal
solution to this problem is to
somehow induce a cultural awakening
whereby people have more children.
>> Mhm. No one's achieved that.
>> I am skeptical about that, but that's
that's the ideal solution.
>> that's why I'm wondering if you have any
concerns about that idea of immigration
decline and therefore population decline
because it does have serious economic
considerations into the future.
>> Yes, but there are serious social and
political consequences to letting many
people in from very different cultures.
And I think that there should be a
middle ground there. Let in some people,
but preferably give some advantages to
the more culturally compatible
nationalities.
>> the southern border that largely
Christian? I mean, they're coming from
countries where America's projected its
power for so long. The Monroe Doctrine,
now the Don Roe Doctrine. That this is
our sphere of influence.
>> I think that the overwhelmingly Hispanic
immigrants coming up through the border
during the Biden administration and
actually just historically for the last
50 years have a higher likelihood of
ultimately assimilating, especially over
multiple generations.
>> didn't like them.
I mean, you you just said you didn't
like them coming in those
in those numbers.
>> like massive
illegal immigration.
I don't. I am all for legal immigration.
And the United States would actually do
better to loosen up on the legal side. I
think we should let more people in
legally and make it easier and cheaper.
>> Okay. You've So often in your books
there are observations about America
which are so striking, so moving. And I
was thinking more about The Mandibles, a
portrait of a family in an America of
the future.
>> Mhm.
>> And where you have these scenes in that
book that are about government excess
and overreach. That you know, soldiers
barging into people's homes, wanton
destruction.
It made me wonder what you think of the
tactics of ICE now in early 2026.
>> I don't like the tactics. It doesn't
mean that I I think we shouldn't deport
anybody. I don't I don't think that the
dude shootings
uh in Minneapolis look to me to be
justifiable. I think that the whole look
of the operation has been overly
militarized.
They don't look like police. They look
like the army. I think it's been too
too aggressive.
Uh on the other hand,
this whole business of having sanctuary
cities and even sanctuary states
means that the authorities are not
cooperating with the
federal law enforcement and
since ICE is prioritizing going after
criminal aliens, uh these sanctuary
localities have made that made that much
harder.
>> A lot of the people in ICE detention are
not criminals.
>> Well, one of the reasons they are ending
up arresting more what's known as the
the collateral damage of people who
don't have criminal records is because
they can't just go to the jails when
these people are being let out and put
them into ICE custody. So, I I think
that the sanctuary city policy is
backfiring in those localities' own
terms because if if they wanted to
protect people who didn't have criminal
records from deportation, then they're
doing the wrong thing.
>> There are other aspects of ICE tactics
beyond the use of force. There's things
like going into a Hyundai car plant.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> And rounding up loads of South Koreans
like from a country which is investing
hundreds of millions of dollars in the
United States.
>> I don't defend the way these things are
done.
>> But I think you like the I think you
like the result of it. That that's the
complexity I'm I'm interested in.
>> don't like the fact that they shot two
people.
>> But you like the fact that overall these
are the tactics that have resulted in a
massive decline in immigration.
>> The one thing that I do like
is that these deportations, which by the
way are still fewer
than Obama
per year deported, and he didn't get any
stick at all. These have just been very
high-profile. What I do like
is they're getting a lot of press, and
therefore it's basically sending out an
advertisement to the rest of the world
that no, immigration to the United
States is not, after all, a human right,
and do not expect to arrive in the US,
especially by illegal means or even by
overstaying your visa, and think that
you can stay there forever without our
permission.
So, it's sending a signal, which is
effective. It's working.
>> You were born in North Carolina.
>> Yes.
>> Why did you leave the US as a young
woman back in the mid-1980s?
>> Yeah, that would have been about right.
That's right. And I spent most of my
adulthood outside of the country.
>> Yeah, 40 years, nearly 40 years away.
>> Yeah.
>> What was the cause?
>> I just had an appetite for adventure.
The United States seemed like a known
quantity, which is probably ignorant on
my part. It wasn't.
But I just wanted to find out about
other places, and I also was motivated
to
learn about other places and set books
in other places. So,
initially,
I was thinking I would lead a very
peripatetic life, and I would change
countries every time I wrote a new book.
This was a tall order, and it was a
complete misreading of my own character.
I'm much more of a homebody than that.
And also, even in terms of international
travel,
I discovered that I was far more
interested in staying in one place for a
long time and really learning about it,
and knowing people, making friends. I
stayed in Belfast long enough to make
enemies. That's when you've really
arrived.
>> Belfast, I did wonder about moving to
Northern Ireland.
>> years.
>> So, Northern Ireland in the 1980s was in
the midst of the Troubles.
>> Yes, although, you know,
it was a lot safer than people thought.
You know, it was not a a brave choice.
>> But were you attracted to it because it
seemed risky, a contrast to growing up
as the daughter of a minister?
>> You know, I don't think it was the risk
exactly that interested me, but I had a
story that I wanted to set there. I had
a character that I wanted to use
who belonged in that context. But
eventually, I became engaged by
the politics. My 20s were not
particularly political. I I wanted to be
a novelist, but it was I was interested
in stories and and language, and it was
only when I arrived in Belfast that I
started getting much more political.
>> Mhm.
>> And I it was a
that period of my life was a real PhD in
conflict studies.
>> Because you have then often drawn on
current themes for your books. We need
to talk about Kevin, your most famous
book. There's a school shooting at the
heart of it. These were the years after
the Columbine High School massacre. So,
I can see that thread running through
your books. They're not divorced in any
way from from issues and from current
affairs. But the early influences in
your life, that sitting in church
listening to your father preach, does
some of your skill with language come
from that, seeing how your father used
words?
>> Yes, probably. I couldn't stand going to
church as a kid, and I rebelled against
it.
>> At what
>> And I'm still not a a practicing
Christian of any kind. However, my
father was a fine orator, and I think
that helped me. I also grew up in a
household where
as you're advised to do with children,
they used their full, complex, educated
vocabulary. So, I grew up learning fun,
long words, right? And that was a huge
favor to me.
I uh
I've always been grateful for for having
become very fluent in the English
language as a child. I've been crushed
to discover that this ability to learn
English as a child does not transfer to
being able to learn any other language.
It's not the same skill. I've been so
disappointed.
>> So, you rebelled against church. You
also rebelled
against femininity, would that be right
when you decided to change your name to
Lionel
from
Margaret?
>> Yeah, I think that was part of it.
I was not a
a girly girl. I grew up between two
brothers,
and I've always been ambivalent about
being female. I'm used to it.
But, I
I don't know. If if I had a choice to
start with, I'd probably
probably choose to be male.
That may be simplistic, you know,
the men have their own problems.
And the thrust of my approach to to
feminism as opposed to femininity
is that I'm interested in in minimizing
the importance of sex. I feel that I
have more in common with men than I have
differences, and I I like the company of
men. I accept that there are differences
between the sexes,
but
when I was younger, the thrust of
feminism was really more interested in
erasing the hard line between the sexes
and and recognizing our commonality.
And I'm I'm still in that place.
>> It's interesting to hear you talk about
that in the knowledge that your next
book is around transgender issues.
>> That's one of my biggest problems with
the transgender movement is the emphasis
on the importance of sex and that being
so determinative
of identity. And I think that's a false
version of identity. I don't derive a
lot of the meaning of my life and who I
think I am from my sex. It's just not
that important to me. It's one of the
reasons that I haven't been a big
advocate for feminism.
Uh not that I think there's anything
wrong with it, but it's not what
interests me. And just because I was
born female in a certain era that I'm
obliged somehow to put all my energies
into that.
>> But did your engagement in in seeing
transgender issues play out make you
feel more female? That's kind of where
the battle lines were drawn that
for those who have objected to the
growth of the transgender movement, it
was like, "No, we are female. We're
going to stand on that hill." I think
you're coming to it from a slightly
different direction,
>> Yes, I I am coming at from a a different
direction. So, it's not that I'm
defending my sex from people who want to
invade and and and no, you can't have
it. I'm saying there what's to have? You
know, what what's so great about being
female? What's so great about being
either sex? That's not what I understand
to be
uh an identity. When I was growing up,
having an identity,
it didn't have to do with
race, it didn't have to do with sex.
It had to do with
what what bands did you listen to? What
books did you fall in love with? What
movies knock your socks off? Um what
what did you want to do? What were you
good at? What were your interests? What
did you hate? You know, who whom did you
love?
That's in the mix.
But the trans thing doesn't even have to
do with
sex, you know, having sex. It's all
about
really stereotypes of what it means to
be male and female, and those are the
same stereotypes that I rejected when I
was, you know, 15.
>> Can I share one observation where my
heritage plays into how I see your
issues? I definitely In the In the '80s
in the UK, yeah, no one would have asked
me where my parents were from.
It just wasn't part of the conversation.
But now that people do comment on that,
and I might talk about it a bit, or it's
just more recognized as part of me, I
appreciate that. It's not the be-all and
end-all. It's not like
more a more important aspect of my
identity than something else, but it's
kind of nice that it's recognized as
part of me.
>> Absolutely. Nothing wrong with that.
>> one's skimming over it.
>> Um, what is your background?
>> My parents uh came to the UK from
Pakistan. Muslim, Pakistani Muslim.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. But recently through Who Do You
Think You Are, I found out that I have
American Revolutionaries in my ancestry.
>> Oh, that's fascinating.
>> And actually, reading your book, its
title A Better Life, the ancestor I
thought of was not my father moving to
the UK as a doctor, but
the great-grandfather four generations
back who decided to leave Massachusetts
for India because that's where the
opportunity was back in
1815, rather than the cold winters of
Massachusetts.
>> sounds like a fascinating history.
>> a long sweep, right, of the kinds of
shifts that you're talking about, and
they are linked to
empire and the global economy and
nations having interests all around the
world, powerful nations.
>> Well, I mean it sounds to me as if your
family has a unique
and and compelling history.
>> Not unique, I'm sure.
>> Well, maybe not perfectly unique, but
particular.
And uh there's nothing wrong with
finding that story rich and identifying
with it, but you also have a
considerable career and I would be
surprised if that's the only thing.
That's what you reduce yourself to. It's
one ingredient of many.
>> Yeah.
The UK, the country that you lived in
for nearly 40 years before leaving.
I'm curious about why you left. What
what was the cause?
You live in Portugal now.
>> Yes. I mean there was a host of positive
reasons. Um
we have friends that preceded us there,
good friends.
My husband is a jazz drummer and he's
played with Portuguese musicians for
years, so that we had a kind of
ready-made alternative social life.
And
we were both reaching an age that if we
were going to ever make a major
geographical change, we better do it
soon cuz otherwise that
would pass us by. We'd probably just age
in place or even worse in my view, just
withdraw back to the United States. I
that that kind of a future I found a
little
disappointing. Um
and on the negative side, I felt
things are not going very well in this
country and
I didn't have to be a part of that
deterioration.
And there were little things. I mean
the new tax system
that they were bringing in for
self-employed people.
>> But also immigration.
>> No, it was That was not a major factor.
>> Really? I've heard you suggest that.
>> that misquoted me altogether.
>> Well, tell me in your own words cuz I've
heard you say things like the
neighborhood you were living in in
London became very changed. It became
very Nigerian.
>> It was mostly yes, mostly North African.
And it had been a white working class
area and the original population had
completely
disappeared.
>> And that was part of your thinking.
Wasn't it? That you felt you weren't
functionally living in England anymore.
>> Well, that is correct. London is no
longer
an English city. But that was not the
driving reason that I I left the
country.
>> I mean you you have Again, I've heard
you say
several times on podcasts that
the experience of Muslim immigrants in
particular to the UK and Europe has been
catastrophic.
>> I am worried that we're dealing with a
certain civilizational
incompatibility.
And I think that's especially the case
when we're dealing with mass
immigration.
And uh
the experience of Muslims in the United
States has been very different because
the quantity has been
small. And uh American Muslims are
overwhelmingly well integrated with the
rest of the country. They're usually
well educated.
Um
They earn a lot of money.
They're prosperous. And they fit in well
with US society. And I think that's
that's one of my concerns about mass
immigration as opposed to
immigration is that when you establish
whole communities of people from
elsewhere, then there's no need to fit
in with the larger population.
>> But what you call mass immigration and I
think specifically your issue has been
with largely with Muslim immigration,
right? That's That's what I've I've
heard you say. No, in the in the UK.
>> In the UK that's obviously one of the
big issues.
>> And what are the problems that you see
more broadly? Because these are very
broad things you're saying about
assimilation, but
uh the Home Secretary in this country is
a Muslim. The mayor of London is a
Muslim. The youngest Nobel laureate in
the world is a Muslim who lives here.
So, you're generalizing, aren't you?
>> Of course I'm generalizing.
>> In a way
>> a conversation.
>> We are, but I mean when you make such
generalizations
>> you know, there's been a lot of
integration at the top politically and
socially, but on the ground, you know,
there are there is a
um
discomfort. Okay, I'm going to make
generalizations and it doesn't apply to
everyone.
But I'd happily make generalizations
about Americans, so.
Discomfort with freedom of speech,
right? Pressure Pressure for censorship.
Pressure for the larger society to
recognize what are de facto blasphemy
laws. Practices like female genital
mutilation coming out of North and and
East Africa.
>> That's something that comes that that
that's something that comes is not
rooted in Islam in
>> No, it isn't, but it does It comes with
Muslims. It's not necessarily We're
generalizing.
>> we are. I guess
I feel like I've I've read your books
for so many years. There are such
deep and beautiful portraits of
individuals, of relationships, of
characters within them. And then I read
your non-fiction and I hear you on
podcasts and you're very willing to
extrapolate massively from social
problems that definitely exist that
perhaps might be better tackled without
the big generalization, without making
people feel you're seeing a mass rather
than individuals.
>> Well, when you write a column, I mean,
you're devil's advocating because you
understand this better than you're
pretending. As a journalist, and you're
an opinion journalist, you have to make
generalizations. You have to make a
point.
That's what I do. I have a column in the
Spectator.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh and if you're going to make a broad
point, you inevitably
make generalizations that don't
necessarily apply to everyone. And if
you restrict yourself to making
assertions that apply to absolutely
everybody, you basically don't write a
column.
>> Right, I get that, but I still think
there's something about evidence, isn't
there? And
>> try to use evidence when I'm backing up
a position.
And in fact,
I do in the novel as well.
>> Mhm.
>> And A Better Life is set, I would say,
profoundly in a time and place, and all
of the events in the novel that are not
to do with my particular little story
are real-life events, and therefore,
that's evidence. And that's what happens
in non-fiction as well. You assemble a
set of facts and try to persuade the
reader that you your general view here
is is valid.
>> Do you think that your fiction has been
changed by your immersion in social and
political issues? I'm trying to think of
another novelist who writes as much
non-fiction as in as many regular
columns as you do at the same time as
they're as they're writing numerous
novels, and I'm wondering what the
what the crossover is between the two.
>> I think there's considerable crossover.
I'm interested in the world, you know,
I'm interested in
the big issues of my day.
And I'm getting older and life is short
and if I'm going to
participate
in
the world as opposed to
stay back and be an artist and and write
these rarefied, you know, pretty
sentences. You know, that's a choice and
I've made my choice. I'm going to be
part of the world. I have made, some
would say, a sacrifice in
exposing
cheerfully exposing what I think
uh in non-fiction. And therefore, I have
sacrificed any sense of
mystery, right? I am
horribly accessible. And you don't have
to spend a lot of time wondering
what I'm like and what I think really
because you just have to open the
newspaper.
>> Or listen to podcasts or when you're in
the UK you were frequently on news
programs, um for example.
>> And the other sacrifice is that, you
know, everyone doesn't agree with my
positions. You don't. And therefore, I
alienate I potentially alienate part of
my audience. And I guess I accept that.
That's what happens when
you take positions on things. Other
people are going to disagree with you,
which is fine.
>> Mhm.
>> It's it's a it's a large world.
>> Totally.
>> And that's that's okay.
>> in it, thankfully.
>> Yeah.
>> But in fairness, I I I would like to
clarify that it's not that I'm
disagreeing with you. I'm curious about
your evidence and and I think that
you do often make very broad assertions
that do leave things out of it. Again,
that's your prerogative. You're
concentrating more on on an individual
And social ills are important, don't get
me wrong. I think a lot of the issues
you highlight are really important and
deserve to be properly tackled through
conversation and action. Um I'm just
wondering if that process is a bit
harder when there are lots of
generalizations.
>> I feel that you're really talking about
about my columns and not about the
novels.
>> Okay. Well, actually I did want to talk
about the novels tonight because I was
reading We Need to Talk About Heaven
again
before this interview. It came out in
2005, so I first read it a very long
time ago.
And it made me think about the the depth
of the way you write that you could
easily think about this book as being
about a school shooting, but actually
it's about a female protagonist about
her attitude to motherhood and marriage
and there's so many really
deep characterizations.
And
in A Better Life, I think you're not
going quite as deep into the into the
characters. Are you writing books
perhaps faster than you did in the past?
>> No, I don't think I'm writing them
faster. I think they're a little
shorter.
Uh part of that is uh
I'm editing more. I think that the
that readers in general, insofar as
there are any of them left, uh prefer
shorter books now
uh because of the you know, the famous
crap attention span. And there's a
sacrifice there. There are things you
can accomplish
with a a much longer book that that you
can't with a shorter book. I mean,
there's there's only And when you have a
certain number of characters, there's
only so deep you're going to get.
>> You've also come back from having a
major illness. You've had a serious
autoimmune disorder that affected you a
lot in the last few years. And how has
that changed your routine, what you feel
able to do, how you want to spend your
day?
>> Well, nowadays it hasn't changed
anything.
>> You're back.
>> Um I had back surgery and it uh
kicked off uh
Guillain-Barré syndrome, which is an
auto immune disease that
means your body is attacking its own
neurological system and in a weird way
this was perfectly designed to fell me
in particular because I'm
a fitness nut.
And the effect of dissolving your
neurological system is to dissolve your
musculature.
So within weeks
my biceps had drooped down into bingo
wings. All my muscles just disappeared.
And I could not stand anymore. I could
only lift a cup of coffee by using both
hands.
I couldn't open my own hair clip.
So I was reduced almost to
to an infant.
And
little by little once I was given a
medication to stop the process, I
recovered my strength, but it was
tedious as hell.
>> Yeah. So you've had to really work hard
at getting your body back to where it
was.
>> And has it changed you having such a
shock to the system realizing how frail
we are when something like that hits us?
>> It was humbling.
Um it made me incredibly grateful to
uh my particularly my husband and my
younger brother
who helped me through it. It it
certainly gave me a
a renewed appreciation for the
importance of marriage and family, also
certain friends
who really redeemed themselves and did
more for me that than I would ever have
expected them to do before this
happened.
So I came out with a sense of gratitude.
I
I certainly was reminded that I was
mortal.
And
I would like to say that I have I've
carried that gratitude
into every waking hour. I'm so glad to
be here. I'm so glad that I can now
you know
I can do calisthenics. I can jump up and
down. I can walk down the street. And I
would love to be able to tell you that I
that I I hold that with me all the time,
but I don't. I'm a normal person. And
you know, once you can go back to
walking around and jumping up and down,
you take it for granted like like
anybody else.
>> Yeah, we forget pretty quickly. Don't
we? We move on. That's probably part of
necessary humanity also putting things
behind us.
>> Yes, well that was one of the things I
learned that you never learn.
>> Lionel Shriver, good luck with the next
book.
>> Thank you so much.
>> a pleasure to talk to you.
>> Thanks for coming in.